upd: Data Analysis (#5514)
JetBrains/kotlin-web-site: docs/topics/data-analysis/data-analysis-work-with-data-sources.md

[//]: # (title: Retrieve data from files)

> [//]: # (description: Learn how to load data from files using Kotlin DataFrame, including CSV, JSON, SQL, Excel, Apache Arrow files.)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[//]: # (description: Learn how to load data from files using Kotlin DataFrame, including CSV, JSON, SQL, Excel, and Apache Arrow files.)
```

For data transformations, you can use such methods as [`add`](https://kotlin.github.io/dataframe/adddf.html), [`split`](https://kotlin.github.io/dataframe/split.html),
[`convert`](https://kotlin.github.io/dataframe/convert.html), and [`parse`](https://kotlin.github.io/dataframe/parse.html). 
Additionally, this toolset enables the retrieval and manipulation of data from various structured file formats, 

> including CSV, JSON, XLS, and Apache Arrow. 

Reviewer 2: Could you please add Parquet here in the row as a supported file format?
https://kotlin.github.io/dataframe/parquet.html

Author: Done

If the Kotlin Notebook features are not available, ensure the plugin is enabled. For more information,
see [Set up an environment](kotlin-notebook-set-up-env.md).

To follow this tutorial:

1. Create a [new Kotlin Notebook](kotlin-notebook-create.md).
2. Import Kotlin DataFrame:

   ```kotlin
   %use dataframe
   ```

> Make sure to run the code cell with the `%use dataframe` line before you run any other code cells
> that rely on the Kotlin DataFrame library.
>
{style="note"}

## Retrieve data

> To retrieve data from a file into your Kotlin Notebook, use `DataFrame.read()`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To retrieve data from a file into your Kotlin Notebook, use the `DataFrame.read()` function:
```

```kotlin
val movies = DataFrame.read(“movies.csv”)
```

> `DataFrame.read()` detects the input format based on the file extension and content.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `DataFrame.read()` function detects the input format based on the file extension and content.
```

> You can also pass additional arguments to control how `DataFrame` reads the input data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can also pass additional arguments to control how the DataFrame library reads the input data.
```
I'm not sure what 'DataFrame` referred to here so I suggested making it about the library.

If the Kotlin Notebook features are not available, ensure the plugin is enabled. For more information,
see [Set up an environment](kotlin-notebook-set-up-env.md).

To follow this tutorial:

1. Create a [new Kotlin Notebook](kotlin-notebook-create.md).
2. Import Kotlin DataFrame:

   ```kotlin
   %use dataframe
   ```

> Make sure to run the code cell with the `%use dataframe` line before any other code cells
> that use Kotlin DataFrame. This loads the library and makes APIs available
> in the notebook.
> 
{style="note"}

## Retrieve data

To retrieve data from a file into your Kotlin Notebook,
use the `DataFrame.read()` function:

```kotlin

> val movies = DataFrame.read(“movies.csv”)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
val movies = DataFrame.read("movies.csv")
```

```

The `DataFrame.read()` function detects the input format based on the file extension and content.

You can also pass additional arguments to control how the DataFrame library reads the input data.
For example, the following code specifies a custom delimiter (`;`) for a CSV file:

```kotlin

> val movies = DataFrame.read(“movies.csv”, delimiter = ‘;’)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
val movies = DataFrame.read("movies.csv", delimiter = ';')
```

## Display data

> Once you [have the data in your notebook](#retrieve-data), you can display it. For that, 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once you [have the data in your notebook](#retrieve-data), you can display it. The easiest way is to
```

store your data in a variable and then return it:

```kotlin

> val dfJson = DataFrame.read("jsonFile.json")

Reviewer 2: to follow your style above, what's about jsonDf?

Author: Good point! Updated naming and screenshots :)

jsonDf
```

This code displays the data from your file as an interactive table:

![Display data](display-data.png){width=700}

You can use this view to inspect values, check column names, and easily understand 
the state of your dataset.

## Inspect data structure

> To gain insights into the structure or schema of your data, apply the `.schema()` function on your `DataFrame` variable. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To gain insights into the structure or schema of your data, use the `.schema()` function on your DataFrame variable. 
```
It's best to avoid "apply" where possible since we have a scope function with that name :)

> For example, `jsonDf.schema()` lists the type of each column in your JSON dataset:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, use the `jsonDf.schema()` to list the type of each column in your JSON dataset:
```
To make it more direct.

![Schema example](schema-data-analysis.png){width=700}

With Kotlin Notebook, you can also use the autocompletion feature. It allows you to quickly access

> and manipulate the properties of your `DataFrame`. After loading your data, simply type the 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and manipulate the properties of your DataFrame. After loading your data, simply type the 
```

> `DataFrame` variable followed by a dot(`.`) to see a list of available columns and their types.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
DataFrame variable followed by a period (`.`) to see a list of available columns and their types.
```
Period is the US spelling :)

![Available properties](auto-completion-data-analysis.png){width=700}

## Refine data

Kotlin DataFrame provides various operations for refining your dataset. 
For example, [grouping](https://kotlin.github.io/dataframe/group.html),
[filtering](https://kotlin.github.io/dataframe/filter.html), [updating](https://kotlin.github.io/dataframe/update.html), or
[adding new columns](https://kotlin.github.io/dataframe/add.html). These functions are essential for data analysis, 
allowing you to organize, clean, and transform your data effectively.

For example, let's look at the `movies.csv` dataset. It stores movie titles and release years 
in the same cell. The goal is to refine this dataset for easier analysis:

1. **Load the data**
   

>    Load the file into a `DataFrame` using `.read()`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Load the file into a DataFrame using the `.read()` function:
```

               ?.toInt()
               ?: -1
       }
   
   moviesWithYear
   ```

3. **Update values**

   To remove the release year from the movie title, update the `title` column:

   ```kotlin
   val moviesTitle = moviesWithYear
       .update("title") {
           "\\s*\\(\\d{4}\\)\\s*$".toRegex().replace(title, "") 
   }
   
   moviesTitle
   ```

   The code keeps the movie titles in one column and moves the release years into another column.

4. **Filter rows**

>    To focus on specific data, use the `filter` method. For example, to keep only the movies

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   To focus on specific data, use the `filter()` function. For example, to keep only the movies
```

   released after 1986, run:

   ```kotlin
   val newMovies = moviesTitle.filter { 
       year >= 1996 
   }
   
   newMovies
   ```
   
5. **Remove column**

>    To remove a column that you do not need, use `remove`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   To remove a column that you do not need, use the `remove()` function:
```

   ```kotlin
   val refinedMovies = newMovies.remove { 
       movieID 
   }
   
   refinedMovies
   ```

For comparison, here is the dataset before refinement:

![Original dataset](original-dataset.png){width=700}

The dataset after refinement:

![Data refinement result](refined-data.png){width=700}

> For additional use cases and detailed examples, see [Examples of Kotlin Dataframe](https://github.com/Kotlin/dataframe/tree/master/examples).
> 
{style="tip"}

## Export data

After [refining data in Kotlin Notebook](#refine-data), you can easily export your processed 
data. 

You can utilize a variety of [`.write()`](https://kotlin.github.io/dataframe/write.html) functions for this purpose. It supports saving in multiple formats,
including CSV, JSON, XLS, XLSX, Apache Arrow, and even HTML tables. 
See all supported formats in the [DataFrame documentation](https://kotlin.github.io/dataframe/data-sources.html).
This can be particularly useful for sharing your findings, creating reports, or making your data available
for further analysis.

> For example, let’s save the result as:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, let's save the result as:
```

* JSON file using [`.writeJson()`](https://kotlin.github.io/dataframe/write.html#writing-to-json):
 
  ```kotlin
  refinedMovies.writeJson("movies.json")
  ```
* CSV file using [`writeCsv()`](https://kotlin.github.io/dataframe/write.html#writing-to-csv): 

  ```kotlin
  refinedMovies.writeCsv("movies.csv")
  ```
* [Apache Arrow files](https://kotlin.github.io/dataframe/write.html#writing-to-apache-arrow-formats) using `writeArrorIPC()` or `writeArrorFeather()`:

  ```kotlin
  refinedMovies.writeArrowIPC("movies.arrow")
  refinedMovies.writeArrowFeather("movies.feather")
  ```

> You can also open a standalone HTML table in your browser. Use [`.toStandaloneHTML()`](https://kotlin.github.io/dataframe/tohtml.html):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can also open a standalone HTML table in your browser with the [`.toStandaloneHTML()`](https://kotlin.github.io/dataframe/tohtml.html) function:
```
